---
date:  Friday, October 20, 2023
tags:
---

# Email should be plaintext

[https://useplaintext.email/|original]

There are two main types of emails on the internet: plaintext and HTML. The
former is strongly preferred, but often isn't set up by default. We'll get you
set up right.

Table of Contents

 1. Recommended email clients for plaintext users
 2. How to set up plaintext with other email clients
 3. Etiquette recommendations for plaintext emails
 4. Why is plaintext better than HTML?
 5. Recommendations for software which sends emails
 6. How to improve these recommendations

This guide is brought to you by sourcehut, the "hacker's forge" for software
development, a platform which utilizes plaintext emails for many features. 100%
open source and no JavaScript required - try it today!

Plaintext certified stamp

Recommended email clients for plaintext users

The following email clients are known to handle plaintext especially well:

  • aerc (TUI)
  • alpine (TUI)
  • bower (TUI)
  • claws mail (GUI)
  • Gnus (emacs)
  • KMail (GUI)
  • MailMate (GUI)
  • mblaze (TUI)
  • meli (TUI)
  • mmh (TUI)
  • mu4e (emacs)
  • mutt (TUI)
  • neatmail (TUI)
  • neomutt (TUI)
  • nmh (TUI)
  • Notmuch (emacs)
  • SquirrelMail (Webmail)
  • Wanderlust (emacs)

These clients all compose plaintext emails by default, with correct quoting and
text wrapping settings, requiring no additional configuration to use correctly.
Want to add your own mail client to this list?

How to set up plaintext with other email clients

If your email provider's webmail doesn't have good plain text support, please
consider writing to <postmaster@yourdomain.com> with a complaint, and using one
of the recommended clients over IMAP & SMTP instead.

Jump to:

  • Afterlogic
  • alot
  • Apple Mail
  • Evolution
  • FairEmail
  • Fastmail
  • Geary
  • Gmail
  • Gyazmail
  • K-9 mail
  • mailbox.org
  • Mailspring
  • Microsoft Outlook (Desktop)
  • Microsoft Outlook (Web)
  • Nine
  • Protonmail
  • Rainloop
  • Roundcube
  • Runbox 7
  • Smail
  • Sogo
  • Sylpheed
  • Thunderbird
  • Tutanota
  • Windows Mail

After configuring your client, be sure to review our etiquette recommendations.

Afterlogic

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

Afterlogic does not support plain text email. Please ask them for it and use a
different mail client.

alot

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

alot uses plain text email by default.

Apple Mail

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

 1. Select Mail → Preferences from the menu
 2. Visit the "Composing" category
 3. Change the "Message Format" (or "Format") option to "Plain Text"

Evolution

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

Plaintext is the default. To enable bottom-posting:

 1. Select Edit → Preferences from the menu
 2. Select Composer Preferences → General
 3. Enable "Start typing at the bottom"

You can also prefer to show the plain text email by default when viewing
multipart messages:

 1. Select Edit → Preferences from the menu
 2. Select Mail Preferences → HTML Messages
 3. Select your preference from the "HTML Mode" options

FairEmail

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

 1. Visit Settings → Send
 2. Scroll to the Message section
 3. Toggle "Write below the sender's text"
 4. Scroll to the Advanced section
 5. Toggle "Send plain text only by default"
 6. Toggle "'format flowed' for plain text"
 7. Toggle "Follow Usenet signature convention"

When replying, use "Reply to all" instead of "Reply to list".

Fastmail

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

 1. Visit Settings → Customize → Preferences
 2. Expand "Advanced Preferences" at the bottom of the page
 3. Change "Compose Format" to "plain text"
 4. Disable "When replying, use the same format as the original message"

To wrap text, press Ctrl+M in the composition view.

Geary

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

 1. Compose a new message
 2. On the bottom right, click the three-dotted icon
 3. Select the plaintext option

Geary will remember your preference next time.

To bottom-post, you have to highlight the portion of message that you want to
quote.

Gmail

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

 1. Compose a new message
 2. On the bottom right, click the three-dotted icon
 3. Select the plaintext option

Gmail will remember your preference next time.

Gmail wraps plain text messages at 78 characters.

Gyazmail

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

Gyazmail has the correct settings by default.

K-9 mail

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

 1. Tap the three lines on the top left
 2. Select Settings
 3. Tap the email address you wish to configure → Sending mail
 4. Change the Message Format to Plain Text
 5. Select "Reply after quoted text"

It is also recommended that you select "Manage identities", and for each
identity, untick "Use Signature". This will remove "Sent from K-9" from your
emails.

mailbox.org

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

 1. Click the "gear" icon on the top right
 2. Go to the E-mail section
 3. Uncheck "Allow HTML formatted email messages" under "View"
 4. Go to the Compose sub-section
 5. Select "Plain text" under "Format email messages as"

You can request better plaintext support via their user forum.

Mailspring

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

 1. Tap the three lines on the top right
 2. Select Preferences → General
 3. Unselect "Enable rich text and advanced editor features"

Mailspring supports basic plaintext composing. You can also create a single
plain-text email by holding Alt or Option while clicking "Compose" or "Reply".
Request more features by asking them for it.

Microsoft Outlook (Desktop)

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

 1. Select File → Options → Mail
 2. Under "Compose Messages", select "Plain Text" from the "Compose messages in
    this format" options.

Microsoft Outlook (Web)

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

 1. Click the gear icon on the top right
 2. Click "View all Outlook settings"
 3. Go to Mail → Compose and reply
 4. Scroll down to "Message format"
 5. Change HTML to Plain text
 6. Click "Save"

Nine

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

 1. Open the side menu and click the "gear" icon
 2. Select General, then Composer
 3. Under Editor, change the Editor option to "Text editor"

Protonmail

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

Notice: Use of IMAP and SMTP with Protonmail requires the use of a bridge. A
third-party, MIT-licensed bridge is available. Proton technologies also makes
the source code to their official bridge available under the
GNU-GPL-3.0-or-later.

 1. Visit Settings → Appearance
 2. Set "Composer Mode" to "Plain Text"

It's also recommended that you visit Settings → Account → Identity and remove
the default email signature.

Rainloop

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

 1. Click the "person" icon on the top-right corner and choose "Settings"
 2. Set "Default text editor" to "Plain"

Roundcube

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

 1. Click Settings on the top-right
 2. Select Preferences → Composing Messages
 3. Select "never" under "Compose HTML messages"
 4. Select Composing Messages
 5. Select "Start new message below the quote" under "When replying"

Also consider setting "Automatically add signature" to "never".

Runbox 7

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

Runbox 7 uses plain text email by default.

Smail

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

Smail uses plain text email by default.

Sogo

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

 1. On the top-right, click the gear to open Preferences
 2. Select the Mail tab
 3. Change "Compose messages in" to "Plain text"
 4. Click the green "Save" icon on the top-right

Sylpheed

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

 1. Open Configuration → Common preferences
 2. Visit the Compose → Editor tab
 3. Enable "Wrap on input"

Thunderbird

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

 1. In the accounts tab, right click on your account
 2. Select "Settings"
 3. Select the "Composition & Addressing" settings
 4. Disable "Compose messages in HTML format"
 5. Select "Start my reply below the quote"
 6. Repeat this for any other email accounts

Tutanota

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

Notice: Use of IMAP and SMTP, open standards for email clients, is not possible
with Tutanota. This is not acceptable behavior for an email provider and use of
Tutanota is strongly recommended against for this reason. Tutanota's stated
reasons for not supporting these protocols are lies and you would be well
served by closing your account there.

 1. Visit Settings → Email → Formatting
 2. Set the format to plain text

Windows Mail

Compose in plaintext Wraps text or format=flowed Supports bottom posting

Windows Mail does not support plain text email. Please issue a feature request
through the Feedback Hub app, and use a different mail client.

Etiquette recommendations for plaintext emails

In addition to training you that HTML emails are the norm, many harmful mail
clients may have trained you with other bad habits. Here are some tips to
unlearn them:

Top posting

When you reply to an email, many email clients will include a quoted version of
the message you're replying to beneath the text of your reply. This leads to
long email threads containing the entire history of the discussion in an
increasingly long and nested footer on every email. This is called "top
posting" and is strongly discouraged.

Though some clients would have you believe otherwise, you can edit the quoted
version of the message you're replying to, and you're encouraged to. Feel free
to trim it down, cutting out any extra text which isn't directly relevant to
your reply - or removing it entirely. Write anything you have to say underneath
the quote it pertains to.

  • A: Because it reverses the logical flow of conversation.
  • Q: Why is top posting frowned upon?

Wrapping your text

Email writers are encouraged to wrap their text at 72 columns by inserting a
newline and resuming your writing on the following line. The recommended
clients will do this for you, as well as any client shown above with "Wraps
text or uses format=flowed" checked. Don't worry about re-wrapping the quoted
parts of message you're replying to unless you want to. If your client doesn't
do this for you, it can easily be the most frustrating part of being a good
email netizen, but it's very much appreciated by recipients.

Why is plaintext better than HTML?

HTML emails are mainly used for marketing - that is, emails you probably don't
want to see in the first place. The few advantages they offer for end-users,
such as links, inline images, and bold or italic text, aren't worth the
trade-off.

HTML as a vector for phishing

HTML emails allow you to make links which hide the URL behind some
user-friendly text. However, this is an extremely common vector for phishing
attacks, where a malicious sender makes a misleading link which takes you to a
different website than you expect. Often these websites are modeled after the
login page of a service you use, and will trick you into entering your account
password. In plaintext emails, the URL is always visible, and you can more
easily make an informed choice to click it.

Privacy invasion and tracking

Virtually all HTML emails sent by marketers include identifiers in links and
inline images which are designed to extract information about you and send it
back to the sender. Examine the URLs closely - the strange numbers and letters
are unique to you and used to identify you. This information is used to hack
your brain, attempting to find advertisements which are more likely to
influence your buying habits. HTML emails are good for marketers and bad for
you.

Mail client vulnerabilities

HTML is an extremely large and complicated set of specifications designed
without emails in mind. It's designed for browsing the world wide web, on which
a huge variety of documents, applications, and more are available. Implementing
even a reasonable subset of these standards represents hundreds of thousands of
hours of work, or even millions. A large subset (perhaps the majority) of these
features are not desirable for emails, and if included can be leveraged to leak
information about you, your contacts, your calendar, other emails in your
inbox, and so on. However, because of the herculean effort necessary to
implement an HTML renderer, no one has built one specialized for emails which
is guaranteed to be safe. Instead, general purpose web browsers, with many of
their features disabled, are employed in most email clients. This is the number
one source of vulnerabilities in email clients which result in information
disclosure and even the execution of arbitrary malicious code.

This is a list of 421 remote code execution vulnerabilities in Thunderbird. If
you're bored, try finding one that doesn't exploit web tech.

HTML emails are less accessible

Browsing the web is a big challenge for users who require a screenreader or
other assistive tools to use their computer. The same problems apply to email,
only more so - making an accessible HTML email is even more difficult than
making an accessible website due to the limitations imposed on HTML emails by
most mail clients (which they have no choice but to impose - for the security
reasons stated above). Plain text emails are a breeze in comparison for
screenreaders to recite, especially for users with specialized email clients
designed for this purpose. How do you speak bold text aloud? How about your
inline image?

Some clients can't display HTML emails at all

Some email clients don't support HTML emails at all. Many email clients are
designed to run in text-only environments, like a terminal emulator, where
they're useful to people who spend a lot of time working in these environments.
In a text-only interface it's not possible to render an HTML email, and instead
the reader will just see a mess of raw HTML text. A lot of people simply send
HTML emails directly to spam for this reason.

Rich text isn't that great, anyway

Rich text features desirable for end users include things like inline images,
bold or italicized text, and so on. However, the tradeoff isn't worth it.
Images can simply be attached to your email, and you can employ things like
*asterisks*, /slashes/, _underscores_, or UPPERCASE for emphasis. You can still
communicate your point effectively without bringing along all of the bad things
HTML emails come with.

━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

In short, HTML emails are a security nightmare, are mostly used for advertising
to you and tracking you, are less accessible for many users, and don't offer
anything especially great for it.

Recommendations for software which sends emails

Thanks for your interest in making plaintext emails more accessible to your
users!

For senders of automated emails

  • If you must use HTML, send a multipart/alternative email with both a
    plaintext and HTML version included. Your programming language probably
    includes tools for creating these kinds of emails.

For senders of user-authored emails

  • Allow users to compose emails in plaintext, and consider making this the
    default. When the user composes a message in plaintext, send a text/plain
    email instead of a multipart/alternative email with a generated HTML part.
  • When composing a plaintext email, hard-wrap their lines at 72 columns by
    inserting newlines at the nearest word boundary. Optionally, use format=
    flowed instead to allow plaintext emails to be displayed and composed
    without hard wrapping.
  • When users reply to an email in plaintext, don't encourage top-posting by
    leaving their cursor above the quoted message. Instead, add two newlines
    after the quoted message and leave their cursor there. Allow the user to
    edit the quoted message. Quote each line of the original message with > and
    a single space, followed by the quote.
  • When users send an HTML email explicitly, convert it to text/plain and send
    a multipart/alternative email which includes both versions.
  • When displaying multipart/alternative emails, give the user the option to
    prefer to view the plaintext part by default.

Email clients which meet all of these criteria and prefer plaintext by default
are entitled to a spot on our recommended clients list.

How to improve these recommendations

Do you want to add instructions for a new email client? Have suggestions or
questions? Please send a plain text email to ~sircmpwn/public-inbox@lists.sr.ht
. You can also email a patch to this address. The code may be found on
git.sr.ht.

━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

"But if plaintext is so good, why is this page written in HTML?"
This is a reference document, not an email, you twit.

This site is under a MIT license. "Plaintext Certified" graphic by Jens,
CC-BY-SA.

